Hello and welcome to teaching and learning with RStudio Cloud. My name is
Mina Chetinkar-Randell. I am a professional educator and a data
scientist with RStudio as well as a professor of the practice at Duke
University in the statistical science department. I've been teaching and
learning in RStudio for many many years now and over the last few years I've
really enjoyed being able to teach with RStudio Cloud. In this webinar I want to
talk to you a little bit about what RStudio Cloud is, how you can teach and
learn with it, and I want to particularly highlight some of the new developments
in RStudio Cloud that I think would be of interest to educators. The webinar
will be streamed live on YouTube and I will be also answering questions during
the live stream so if you think of any questions as we're going through things
please put them in the chat and I will be there to answer them. And you can also
see a link on the slides rstd.io slash TL dash RS Cloud and that's where you
can find the PDF of the slides as well. So let's start with what is RStudio
Cloud. RStudio Cloud is a lightweight cloud-based solution that allows anyone
to do, share, teach, and learn data science online in the browser. So all you
need is a computer with an internet connection and a browser to be able to
start computing with R. You do not actually need to install anything. So
there's nothing to configure, no dedicated hardware, and no installation.
That's what I think makes it really easy for students to get started with
computing and that's what makes RStudio Cloud an attractive choice for
teaching. So let's talk a little bit about RStudio Cloud. This is what RStudio
Cloud looks like when you've logged on. So over here you can see a little link
that says new project and I'm going to click on that and I'm going to select new
RStudio project. This takes a second to deploy a project which is basically the
same as an RStudio project. I can give it a name in the web user interface and
the rest of it is basically the RStudio IDE that you're accustomed to. You can
see that I can start computing right away. So let's start by asking the
question, why might we want to use RStudio in the cloud? If we are actually
teaching with a local installation, the students when they first come to class
they would need to first install R and then install RStudio and then maybe
install a bunch of packages that you're going to use, then load these packages. If
you're teaching with version control they will also need to install git and
that has a lot of potential friction points. Maybe some steps are easier than
others but if we were to actually go try to go through each of these steps with
the audience right now we probably wouldn't be able to get through it so
quickly. On the other hand when you are teaching with RStudio cloud what you can
tell your students is go to RStudio cloud, just log in and start coding. Much
less friction to get started with. So how might you access RStudio in the cloud?
You have a couple options. Your first option is using RStudio Workbench
which is basically a professional product offered by RStudio. This
requires that you yourself as an educator either have some sysadmin
experience or you have some IT support who can help you set this up. You also
need either a hardware to run this piece of software, a local virtual
machine, or some cloud computing credits because your students are going to be
computing somewhere and that needs to happen either in the cloud where you're
paying for it or you have credit for it or on a local hardware. Obviously you
also need to have RStudio experience because you are teaching with RStudio.
If this actually defines you well, RStudio makes RStudio Workbench,
licenses it for free as part of their academic pricing. So you can go to
rstudio.com slash pricing slash academic dash pricing and you can read a little
bit about it. I think they want something like a syllabus to show that you're
going to be using this for teaching and you can get that. And if this is of
interest to you we actually have a paper in the American Statistician called
Infrastructure and Tools for Teaching Computing throughout the statistical
curriculum where we go into the details of how you can set this up for your
students. But as you saw there's lots that's needed to be able to get started
with this and if you neither have the sysadmin experience or you don't have
the IT support available to you this may be a little bit out of reach. With
RStudio Cloud really all you need to have is RStudio experience and nothing
else. So I think that's one thing that makes it quite attractive as an
educator especially if you're teaching statistics or data science. You may not
have the sysadmin experience or you may not have the resources listed there to
be able to run this stuff locally. So next question is fine maybe I've
convinced you that teaching your students how to use R and RStudio in
the cloud is a good idea that they should be just going to their web
browser and starting doing computing. Why RStudio Cloud then and maybe not
some other option? Well let's talk about RStudio Cloud in a nutshell. We already
said that it does not require IT experience to set up. It also has some
features designed for teaching. For example you can organize your classes as
a workspace. You can leverage roles so you can have different roles for your
instructor, yourself, your teaching assistants, or your students. You can turn
projects into assignments which is using vocabulary your students are
familiar with. You can actually peek into student projects which is hugely helpful
when you're trying to help them out especially remotely. And you can ensure
the same setup for all the student projects using the concept of a base
project that we'll touch on in a little bit.
Additionally certain system libraries work out of the box like you can you
know get started with git without actually having to install it. And you
can knit to PDF and Word out of the box as well as opposed to having your
students you know having locally set up something like LaTeX or having access
to Microsoft Word. Let's talk a little bit about projects in RStudio Cloud
which is basically how we encapsulate our work and how we organize it. There
are three types of projects. The first one is the RStudio project that we have
already seen. We had created this project. I had named it my first RStudio project.
I've also shown you that you know you can do plotting and whatnot. It's
basically the IDE you're familiar with and we're typing our code here. An
alternative is a Jupyter project. This is a new feature and it's in beta so there
may be changes to it. There will probably be updates to it. We can go to the same
menu and choose a Jupyter project and you can see that you're basically
finding yourself in a Jupyter notebook and you can launch it and you know you
can start running some Python code there as well. Now you can also run Python code
in the RStudio IDE via the reticulate package. So this is not the
only way that you could be using RStudio Cloud for teaching Python but using
Jupyter notebooks is beyond just teaching Python. This is just one example
where you're actually running Python code. Additionally you can start a
project from a Git repository. This is something I use very regularly because I
teach using Git and GitHub. I teach Git as a version control system but we also
use GitHub as kind of our learning management system. Every assignment is a
repository for my students and so they go to GitHub first, grab their private
repository that's named to them, and then they bring in the files that I have put
in that repository to get started. That's basically doing a Git clone if you're
familiar with that language. In order to do this in RStudio Cloud I can again
click on new project, say new project from Git, and paste the URL of the
project. I'm going to simply clone the praise package that basically generates
some random praise that you can use in your work or in your other packages and
you can see that basically we've cloned that project and I can continue working
with this. The RStudio ID already provides a Git tab for me anyway as soon
as it recognizes that this is a Git version controlled project and I can
start interacting with it that way and push and pull to GitHub. Alright so
we've talked about the three ways that you could be working in RStudio Cloud
and creating projects so let's talk a little bit about teaching with RStudio
Cloud. I tend to think of my teaching experiences in one of these two kind of
types, either shorter engagement teaching or longer engagement teaching. What I
mean by shorter engagement teaching is it's maybe a workshop like a couple
hours, a short course at a conference for four hours, or maybe even a full day.
But more importantly than time perhaps is the amount of content where content I
think can be organized in one or just a few projects that I could share with my
learners and additionally in this kind of engagement I'm generally not
interested in keeping track of my learners so I don't have things like
have students completed their homework or maybe I don't after the teaching
engagement is over have a need to go peek into their project to provide
additional support to them. If this is the case I would recommend that you use
kind of the simpler approach of just share a single project with your
learners. If we're thinking about a longer engagement for me that's usually
a semester-long course, a multi-day workshop, or something like that and
again from the content perspective where content can be best organized in
multiple projects. Additionally I want to keep track of my learners. I want to
know who my students are. I want to know if they're in my workspace. I want to
know if they've started their work. I want to be able to provide guidance to
them by sometimes peeking into their projects. If this defines your teaching
engagement then the approach where you invite your students to a workspace
where you have organized the content is I think a better approach. So let's start
with a slightly simpler one where I said would be I believe better suited
for a shorter engagement teaching. In this case we're sharing an RStudio Cloud
project and we'll give the example of a single RStudio Cloud project but as I
said you know if it's just two or three of them and you want to share them
individually that's probably not too confusing for your learners versus in a
longer engagement you might have ten homework assignments and ten labs and a
project and whatnot and you probably don't want to individually share links
for each and every one of those. So how does this go? We're going to be looking
at the instructor view now. So I am in I have created on RStudio Cloud a single
project and I have named it Introduction to Shiny. You can see that on the top
left corner of my screen and you can see that I've created this project in what
is called your workspace. So this is my personal workspace and there I've
created a project called Introduction to Shiny which let's say is the short
course that I'm going to teach at a conference. In the files tab you can see
that I have created some folders where I've organized the content. So if we take
a look at one of those folders let's start with the first module maybe I have
some slides, I have an app in there that the students are going to work with, a
few other app examples that I'm going to teach with. Since I'm teaching Shiny I
definitely want to install the Shiny package, probably other packages too, but
to keep things simple let's also install the Shiny package. So in this project I
have installed the Shiny package now and let's also just confirm that it's been
installed. One thing I'd like to do is I just try to load the package. Does that
work? Let's do library shiny. That seems to be working okay and I'm gonna say
we're good to go and share this content with the students. So you can see all the
structure for the workshop is there. I'm gonna click on that little gear icon, go
to access and for who can view this project I'm gonna say everyone and then
I am going to go up to the URL and simply copy that link. That's it. That's
all I need to share this content with my students and you can see that by using a
nice kind of folder structure I've been able to organize the material for them.
I like naming my folders in this way so learners know where we're at at each
point of a workshop for example. So I've copied the URL after making the project
available to everyone so soon as I turn that switch it is you know available to
the whole world although who will be able to find that project ID it's very
unlikely that someone can stumble upon it unless I share the link with them. On
the student view now they receive that URL from their instructor and so they go
to their URL bar and simply paste it and what they do is they need to now log in.
So they're going to log in to RStudio Cloud. You can log in with Google for
example and they can start computing. They see the same folder structure
everything that I gave them is there. Remember we installed the shiny package
they're able to load it so they don't have to reinstall it again that's
already there for them. They can see the content I've prepared for them they
could even right away go ahead and run the app for example. From the students
perspective this is a really nice way of getting started right we really didn't
have to teach them or at least spend time during the workshop which is about
introduction to shiny in this hypothetical case about how to set
things up for them. So let's talk a little bit about this notion of sharing
a single RStudio Cloud project to disseminate your teaching materials. On
the plus side students land directly in a project upon login right they get the
URL and they're in the RStudio ID which I think is perfect. It's great for
sharing code in general too so I tend to think about this approach not just in
the context of teaching but also in the context of collaboration or you know
sometimes you have this reproducible example that's not quite minimal that
still perhaps takes a lot of code and you really want someone to be able to
dive into your computing environment and see what you're doing that's what it's
also great for just being able to share your entire environment with them. On the
potentially minus side I don't know if your eye caught that but on the
top of the window in the student on the student view you could see in red the
words temporary copy so students need to remember to make a permanent copy of
the project you share with them and they can do that that red you know text
blinks that hopefully gets their attention and there's a little button
right next to it that says save a permanent copy but really what I mean by
this bullet point is that it is on you as the instructor to remind them to do
that because soon as they make a permanent copy their work will be saved
they could close their browser window they could lose power it doesn't matter
they can come back and pick up where they left off however if they have not
made the permanent copy and started working on it and then they close their
window they're gonna actually lose their work and there's nothing more
frustrating to a student than that so this is totally avoidable but you as the
instructor will need to remind them you can't keep track which students started
their assignment so this URL just goes out into the world and anyone who has
access to that can use it but you don't have a way of monitoring who have made
copies of your project and started their assignment if a student wants help from
you in a way where they would want you to peek into their project you need to
be granted permission in order to be able to do that so that's an additional
step for the students to have to do now there are two other bullet points I want
to discuss and these could be pluses it for some of you and minuses for others
these permanent projects once the student makes a permanent project count
towards the students free hours on RStudio Cloud for some this might be okay
because maybe you are in teaching in a situation where you are not going to be
kind of responsible for the cost of the compute your learners are going to be so
in that case this might be okay chances are if you're teaching in a
university setting for example where students you know have already paid for
the course and do not expect to incur additional charges they probably would
not want to be put in a situation where they have a limited number of free hours
to work on their assignment we want students to be working there working on
things as long as they want to and not have these kind of artificial limits on
their learning additionally students control permissions is this a good thing
or a bad thing it again depends if you're teaching in a graded course you
may not want this because it's a too easy a way perhaps for them to share
their work with their classmates which might constitute some sort of academic
misconduct but you might be teaching in a little workshop where this is
perfectly fine so again depending on your situation these could be pros or
cons let's talk also about inviting to an RStudio Cloud workspace which is the
second method of sharing your materials that I mentioned which is for longer
engagement projects so here what we're going to do on the instructor view is
you can see this is my account I have a bunch of projects to myself in my
workspace but I'm going to click on the little kind of hamburger menu there open
the sidebar and create a new space let's say I'm teaching a longer workshop
called shiny essentials this was a two-day workshop I taught this year so I
figured I'd reuse that name and here I can see there's nothing in that workspace
yet I can create a new RStudio project and I can name it something maybe let's
just name it oh one getting started again say that's going to be the first
module in this particular longer workshop that I'm giving so here again
we have an RStudio Cloud project and I can change the access level to everyone
this time it's not everyone in the world it's everyone in this workspace and I'm
going to turn it into an assignment so now when the students get invited to my
workspace and land here they're going to see that they have some assignments they
need to start working on this is not to say it's like homework it's just
something they can get started with and in fact on the student view they see the
word start instead of the word assignment there you can see from a
different so a workshop that I actually did give that was designed in this way
for each of the assignments that I have created I can see the derived project so
I could actually click on there and peek into students projects and this is a
good way the summary statistics here are a good way of gauging for you how many
students have started but also you can deep down dive deeper and look into
their projects which is really nice especially if they need help and you're
teaching remotely and can't just kind of peek over their shoulder in the
members tab of workspace that you create like this you have some options you have
some options about how you want to invite students to your workspace I
generally use the sharing link so it creates a single link and I can pick a
role for people who come into the workspace using that link and we'll say
more about the roles in a second and simply either email that out or if I'm
teaching you know share that during the first few minutes of the teaching
engagement I've covered some names up here to in order not to show the real
students names on the webinar but you can basically see that that would be how
you can keep track of who is in your workspace so the four roles that are
available are admin moderator contributor and viewer and they have
different permission levels so admin is probably you and you can do everything
including managing users a moderator is usually the level of access I give my
teaching assistants they can view and edit and manage all projects so they can
go in and help students but they don't end up managing the users the actual
students who get admitted into the place contributors are basically students who
can only see their work and then viewers I generally use that for like an
auditor in a course or sometimes a guest like a colleague will say I'd like to
see how you're doing things but I don't necessarily want them to see the list of
students you know in my course in the in the members tab so I give them that
lowest level of access we can also set permissions these boxes will be unchecked
by default and I would be encourage you to be carefully thinking about checking
them so do you want your contributors to see the members list you know if you're
teaching a public course maybe not maybe if it's a small university course and
you want everyone to know each other's names maybe you do whether or not
contributors so that students can make their projects visible to all members
again we discussed this notion of potential academic misconduct that could
happen by students being able to too easily share their work perhaps you know
not checking that box is not going to protect you from you know everything
that could go wrong but we don't want to potentially be additionally making
things easy for students if the way the course is set up is such that they
shouldn't see each other's work or if it is that they should be able to then we
could allow them to change that and the third one is about whether they can
change project resources and that's getting into things like the memory and
the compute that they're going to use which gets tied into the pricing which
will say a couple things about at the very end so think about these permission
levels but it's good to know that these are there that you and you can toggle
based on your own teaching situation we also mentioned this notion of a base
project so here in the workspace I've clicked on the gear icon for the
workspace itself where I could rename my course if I wanted to but underneath
it you can see that I can set a base RStudio project so these base projects
include they're basically an any old RStudio cloud project that you kind of
delegate as the base project this is where you can define the R version that
will be used for all projects what packages will be installed and if there
is any certain files that you want repeated across all of the projects in
the course that for me this is usually not data because I usually tend to
change you know data files from assignment to assignment but it's
usually things like a code of conduct maybe submission instructors things that
will stay constant throughout the assignments and you can update it as
many times as you like which is really great because if you you know if there's
a new package comes out or a package gets updated and you want to change
things up in the middle of the semester you can go back and do that and your
changes are not retroactive for a good reason you don't want to mess up
students work that happened prior to that time point so any changes you make
will only affect projects that are created after that change was made so
inviting in RStudio inviting your students to an RStudio cloud workspace
lots of pluses in my opinion various permission levels this notion of base
projects with desired packages installed the notion of assignments which remove
the need to remind students to make a copy of the project before starting work
and this ability to peek into student projects maybe on the minus side one
thing I can think of is that when students land in the workspace they
don't actually land in the RStudio IDE right they need to do an additional
thing to figure out which project to go into next so they may need instructions
like start the assignment titled getting started or something like that easy
enough to handle but something you need to remember as the instructor and again
on could be a pro could be a con side students work now counts towards yours
you know this could be you as an instructor or your institution that
might be paying for the particular level of RStudio cloud for the workspace
hours and that could be a positive or it could be a negative depending on your
situation and instructor controls the permissions and again depending on the
teaching engagement type you have that may be a positive or a negative I tend
to find that for my university teaching these are both pros for me but for other
types of teaching engagements that might be different let's wrap things up with a
few tips for teaching with RStudio cloud so one the first is that when you
changes to an assignment student has started won't propagate to student copy
so if you have set up an assignment for your students and then realize there was
a typo or you forgot to add a data file you're not going to be able to just
change things up and then let it propagate once the students start their
assignment they're actually making a copy of that assignment at that snapshot
of time point so you're gonna need to get that information to them in some
other way if you're teaching with git you could be updating the github
repositories and they could simply pull the changes from there otherwise maybe
you reach out to your students in some other way to let them know of the
corrections packages in the base project are installed but they're not loaded so
don't forget those library commands in the assignments that you give to the
students the latest information is always on the RStudio cloud guide and
the what's new page and you can get to these from the hamburger menu on the
left side of your RStudio cloud window so if you're thinking how do I do X the
guide is probably the first place to look at and if you encounter any sort of
slowness or glitches you know projects not starting up as quickly as they used
to the first place to check is the system status so you can take a again
you can from the left hand menu you can get under help to the current system
status and if there is an outage that will be noted there if there isn't but
you're still experiencing this or your students are experiencing it then you
know reach out to support to let them know if you I would strongly recommend
creating an additional account and log in as a student to see what they see
because what you see is not always what they see and it's nice to be able to
assure yourself that you've set things up the right way especially the first
few times you're teaching with a new technology test assignments to set
sufficient computational resources these are toggles that you can change so you
can see those little toggles on the side here so make sure that you test to make
sure that you know the data size size you have or the computation you're
asking your students will actually work with the allocated kind of RAM and the
CPUs and if not you will be able to toggle those up if you want um the whole
peeking at your students project feature is fantastic but you I believe you might
want to use that sparingly or at least I try to use that sparingly because the
first thing that I want to get my students to do is to learn to articulate
the issues they're having without me going in and fixing it for them that
being said sometimes they may not have the right vocabulary if they're for
especially if they're you know very new to computing to our to our studio so
it's nice to be able to you know push them to articulate these but if that's
not getting anywhere and you're getting frustrated or the students is getting
frustrated it's really nice to be able to peek in and it's additionally helpful
for remote teaching situations as you can imagine the assignment feature even
though the word is assignment I try not to think of it as just homework I also
try to think of it as you know if I'm going to be doing some live coding in
class I'd like to write out a skeleton for myself where I will be filling in
the code and I use that feature to share that code starter with the students so
that some of them if they actually want to code along with me they have that to
get started with a couple other useful resources there is now a nice playlist
with 14 very short and informative videos about how to do much of what I
talked about and more with RStudio Cloud and there's a short link for it on the
top of the screen rstd.io slash cloud dash playlist so you can take a look at
those and watch through them and if you are going to be using RStudio Cloud for
teaching or for other purposes where you think there will be heavy usage lots of
students or maybe lots of projects take a look at the pricing options there is
always a free option although as soon as you're thinking about a classroom with a
substantial number of students the free option may not be the right one for you
may not be sufficient anymore so I would recommend especially taking a look at
the cloud instructor pricing plan and also reaching out to the RStudio sales
folks who work on this to just describe your situation of number of students and
the type of course you're teaching to let them help you help guide you to
figure out the best pricing option for you thank you very much for tuning in
and we'll hang out a little bit in the chat on YouTube as well to answer your
questions once again you can find the slides at rstd.io slash TL dash RS
cloud if you'd like to see a PDF version of those as well have a great day